DECODING VARIABLE NAMES
==================================================================
Participant indicates the number of the participant who was used to collect the data.
Activity is the activity performed by the participant.

The list of features below maybe used to interpret the variable names in the ouput file "BartonTidyData.txt".

t indicates data collected in the time domain.
f indicates data transformed to the frequency domain.
Body indicates data generated by the body of the test participant.
Gravity indidcates data generated by the force of gravity.
Acc indicates data collected from the phones accelerometer.
Gyro indicates data collected from the phone's gyroscope.
Mag indicates that the observation is the magnitude of the three dimensional signal.
Jerk is the caluclated change in acceleration.
mean() is the mean average
std() is the standard deviation
X Y or Z are the direction of the force, if applicable.
Average indicates the value is an average of all data collected for that participant and activity 
        from the source data.

Because all of the data was normalized (as indicated in the source data README),
        units have been omitted.



DESCRIPTION OF VARIABLE CALCULATION
==================================================================
Per source data "features_info.txt:

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

gravityMean
tBodyAccMean
tBodyAccJerkMean
tBodyGyroMean
tBodyGyroJerkMean

The complete list of variables of each feature vector is available in 'features.txt' in the source data
==================================================================

