# Getting-and-Cleaning-Data-Course-Project
Course project for Getting and Cleaning Data
This project was written to meet the objectives for the Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project.

Data files avilable from https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip
The original description of the data is available at http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

To properly execute this script, the data files should be unzipped into the working directory.
The data directory must be named "UCI HAR Dataset", as it is by default.
No changes should be made to any file names or data paths in the data directory.

Per the assignment description, the final tidy dataset is written to a text file (named BartonTidyData.txt).
To read this file back into R appropriately, please run:

BartonTidyData <- read.table("BartonTidyData.txt", header = TRUE)
View(BartonTidyData)

The output table (BartonTidyDat) is a wide tidy dataset.
        The average of each variable generated by the study is represented by one column.
        Each row represents one observation I.E.: One activity performed by one person.
        Variable names are listed across the top row and can be referenced in this README.


The script "run_analysis.R" reads the data contained within UCI HAR Dataset.
The script ignores the additional files contained within the "Inertial Signals" subdirectories
        as per the objectives, they are not necessary and would use uneccessary resources 
        and add excessive complications.
Once read, the data is combined into one table named "alldata".
        Some typographical errors are remedied and the "Activities"" are labeled more descriptively.

Extraneous tables are removed once they are no longer necessary.

The "alldata" table is then grouped and averages of all variables are taken for each 
        activity each participant performed.
        
The variables are described per the source data "features_info.txt" below. 
Only mean (mean()) and Standard Deviation (std()) data were considered per the project objectives.

Per source data "features_info.txt:
=================
The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation

The complete list of variables of each feature vector is available in 'features.txt'
=================

DECODING VARIABLE NAMES
t indicates data collected in the time domain.
f indicates data transformed to the frequency domain.
Body indicates data generated by the body of the test participant.
Gravity indidcates data generated by the force of gravity.
Acc indicates data collected from the phones accelerometer.
Gyro indicates data collected from the phone's gyroscope.
Mag indicates that the observation is the magnitude of the three dimensional signal.
Jerk is the caluclated forth order force based on the acceleration data.
mean() is the mean average
std() is the standard deviation
X Y or Z are the direction of the force, if applicable.
Average indicates the value is an average of all data collected for that participant and activity.

Because all of the data was normalized (as indicated in the source data README, included below),
        units have been omitted.

The experiment as laid out in the source data's README in included below.

Per the source data README:
==================================================================
Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset
Version 1.0
==================================================================
Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory
DITEN - Universit? degli Studi di Genova.
Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy.
activityrecognition@smartlab.ws
www.smartlab.ws
==================================================================

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features_info.txt' for more details. 

For each record it is provided:
======================================

- Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
- Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope. 
- A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables. 
- Its activity label. 
- An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.

Notes: 
======
- Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].
- Each feature vector is a row on the text file.

For more information about this dataset contact: activityrecognition@smartlab.ws

License:
========
Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication [1] 

[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited.

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.


Written by Jones Barton, Research Associate, Arcanum Alloys.